---
layout: default
title: Impro in Theatre
modal-id: 1
date: 2024-09-20
img: 1new.png
video-img: 1new.png
alt: image-alt
client: 
category: Theatre
description: 
---
###IMPRO IN THEATRE

My initial contact with improvisation was in 1996 as an actor using Mike Leigh’s process of character and story development to create a theatre production entitled Scapegoat, which required the actors improvise while performing. I have continued to develop my skills in improvisation having enjoyed acting workshops with Tony Osbourne and Andrew Morrish (twice), and performed regularly using improvised performances in 2009. I also attended a directing workshop on Mike Leigh’s method run by Rob Marchand, and subsequently performed for Rob with other actors at the Screen Directors Conference in Sydney.

Improvisation is at the core of what an actor does – of how he or she creates. It is not enough for a performer to idly recite lines of text. The actor needs to engage with what they are doing in the performance and make their role live.
When an actor performs, he enters the stage having endowed himself with craft to effectively be heard and understood, developed a physicality, analysed the script, developed a characterisation and interpreted meaning. But craft alone is not enough; the craft needs to be related to the performance. For example, when an actor has developed a strong speaking voice, it is not something the actor necessarily should be focusing on when performing a character. The application of an actor’s craft is performed through improvisation:

- All performance uses the body of the actor, giving space and form to an idea, situation, character, text or event in the moment of creation. It does not matter if the work has been rehearsed for a month, with every move, every nuance of speech learned and practised. In the act of performance the actor becomes an improviser. (Frost & Yarrow, 2007, p. 4)

The “moment of creation” is the point of discovery, where something new is realised through an act by the performer. “If we think of art as a means of giving form to life, improvisation can be looked at as one way of adding to our sense of liveliness of art, a means of avoiding the sterility that results from rote recitations of abstract conventional forms” (Wright Wexman, 1980, p. 29). This view is repeated by Dewey and Collingwood (Sawyer, 2000, p. 152-154) who have both developed a theory of art, based on different perspectives of aesthetics, that has resulted in “a theory of the creative process as interpretation” (Sawyer, 2000, p. 152).

The importance of improvisation in the process of acting is reflected in it’s inclusion in many performance methods. Some major western practitioners who have formed performance approaches utilising improvisation include: Stella Adler, Antonin Artaud, Clive Barker, Suzanne Bing, Augusto Boal, Michael Chekhov, Jacques Copeau (first modern use of improvisation for exploratory development), Etienne Decroux, Jerzy Grotowski, Keith Johnstone, Jacques Lecoq, Sanford Meisner, Vsevolod Meyerhold, Michel Saint-Denis, Constantine Stanislavsky (the first modern use of improvisation for rehearsal and training) and Lee Strasberg, to name but a few (Frost & Yarrow, 2007, p. 17-62).

These methods approach performance from different perspectives and use varying terminology to communicate how to act. Below are examined four commonly used terms and how they relate to improvisation. These terms denote different approaches to the creative act and will provide valuable incite into improvisation as practitioners discuss their work.

• To play

- Why begin with the “Jeu”? Because “Jeu” - game and play - is the source of everything: of the pleasure and desire to be an actor. Playing in the theatre is the same as playing at running, jumping, fighting as people and animals do: playing cowboys, Indians, soldiers, doctors and with dolls. … Is my pleasure immense when I play with the freshness of my childhood before a thousand spectators beneath two thousand theatre projectors, or not really so immense? If it’s not immense, leave the stage. You won’t be loved enough. (Gaulier, 2008)

Gaulier’s view is supported by Gale Edwards, who stresses that acting is directly related to an actor’s ability to play (Macauley, 2003, p. 137). Acting requires a person to enter imaginatively into another world, like a child playing a game, but at the same time add “mature attributes like intellect and [an] investigation of ideas” (Macauley, 2003, p. 137).
This type of play directly relates to the same kind of active exploration undertaken with improvisation. Improvisation is a kind of play focused on performance.

• To be in the moment

For an actor to be in the moment infers a conscious effort not to pre-conceive or plan ahead, but to allow actions to come “in response to the immediate stimuli of one’s environment” (Frost & Yarrow, 2007, p. 4).  Being in the moment means to allow ‘this’ moment to play, and see where it takes you (Macauley, 2003, p. 25). The moment allows for spontaneity, for fresh, natural response that leads to an unravelling of dramatic events. This moment is the moment of creation, of discovery, and the same moment being found using improvisation – different terms describing the same creative process.

• Exploring aspects of self

- I think that the revealing of the self – or aspects of the self – in the moment of acting is an unconscious thing, but I think that to allow an unconscious revelation to happen probably requires a ‘conscious’ process. (Australian theatre director Ros Horin, as cited in Macauley, 2003, p. 93)

The actor’s instrument is themself: their body, emotions, voice and mind. This instrument is used to realise characters within a specific dramatic situation. Performance is concerned “with an exploration of ‘self’ and ‘reality’ for performers and/or audience.” (Frost & Yarrow, 2007, p. 18) This exploration is based in the performer’s reality, happens during the performance and manifests itself for an audience. The explorer, as with the improviser, must hold him or herself tenderly open and aware for the discoveries to arrive and these discoveries are what the audience is attentively waiting for.

• Acting / re-acting and listening

- One thing that’s central for an actor is that acting/reacting thing … this kind of connection should be happening automatically. (Australian theatre director Aubrey Mellor, as cited in Macauley, 2003, p. 60)

As improvising is not pre-planned, it is critical that actors listen to one another (Macauley, 2003, p. 77). This listening is a pre-cursor to a response or re-action, which in turn becomes a further catalyst for more actions. This dynamic relationship of acting and re-acting between the actors requires the performer to ‘respond’ to their environment (including other actors) and creates spontaneity. When an actor is not listening it is because they “learnt their lines and … worked out beforehand how they’re going to play the scene” (Macauley, 2003, p. 77).

- Improvisation: the skill of using bodies, space, all human resources, to generate a coherent physical expression of an idea, a situation, a character (even, perhaps, a text); to do this spontaneously, in response to the immediate stimuli of one’s environment, and to do it à l’improviste: as though taken by surprise, without preconceptions.  (Frost & Yarrow, 2007, p. 4)

